When Rust Gets Ugly (#73)
corrode/corrode.github.io: content/blog/ugly/index.md

+++
title = "When Rust Gets Ugly"
date = 2025-07-13
draft = false
template = "article.html"
[extra]
series = "Idiomatic Rust"
+++

In workshops I often see people getting frustrated with Rust.

Here's some of the feedback I hear: 

- The borrow checker rules make it hard to write code that compiles 
- The syntax is complex with too many symbols and operators -- it's overwhelming
- It's difficult to transition to Rust from a language they know 
- Thee written code is not satisfying to read, it feels clunky and verbose

From these frustrations, people often conclude that Rust not for them and quit.

> But after programming in Rust for 10 years, I think that **your coding style has the biggest impact on how your Rust code will look and feel**.

Author: ```suggestion
But after programming in Rust for 10 years, I think that **your coding style has the biggest impact on how your Rust code will look and feel**.

**People often say Rust has ugly syntax, but I'd argue the syntax is the least interesting thing about Rust. Rather, the semantics -- the bits and pieces the language provides to express your ideas and how those bits combine to build interesting things -- is much more important.**
```

Author: Thanks, added.

The most important observation is that these antipatterns have nothing to do with Rust, but with bad coding practices.

The code carries all the hallmarks of a beginner Rust programmer (possibly with a C/C++ background) who has not yet fully embraced the ergonomics Rust provides.

- The code is littered with `unwrap()` calls
- Unnecessary mutability 
- Manual indexing into arrays
- Unnecessary lifetime annotations
- Cryptic variable names
- Very imperative coding style

This not just makes the code harder to read. 
What is worse is that it leads to business logic bugs in the code, because the code makes quite a few unsound assumptions about its input.

If you feel like you're fighting the language, then there's a chance that **the language is trying to tell you something**. 
It tries to push you into a healthier direction, but you are resisting it, which causes friction.
The moment you start to listen to what Rust is trying to teach you, everything snaps into place; writing Rust becomes effortless and feels natural.

Here is one of my favorite things about Rust, that I never experienced in other languages: **better semantics enable nicer syntax.**

> That means, the more you learn about the core mechanics behind Rust (traits, pattern matching, expressions, composition over inheritance, etc.), the more you can leverage these concepts to write code that is readable and extensible.

Author: Should add:

the syntax goes away. It takes a step into the background. It gives way to semantics

Author: Thanks, added.

        if value == "value#not_a_comment" {
            println!("PASS: Comment character in value preserved");
        } else {
            println!("FAIL: Comment character in value not preserved: {}", value);
        }
    } else {
        println!("FAIL: Key with comment in value not found");
    }

    // Test 7: Check multiline key handling (will fail)
    if let Some(value) = config.get("multi\\") {
        println!("PASS: Multiline key handled");
    } else {
        println!("FAIL: Multiline key not handled (expected with simple parser)");
    }

    // Clean up the temporary file
    std::fs::remove_file("temp_config.env").unwrap_or_default();
}
```

Let's be clear: there are many, many antipatterns in the above code.
The most important observation is that these antipatterns have nothing to do with Rust, but with bad coding practices.

The code carries all the hallmarks of a beginner Rust programmer (possibly with a C/C++ background) who has not yet fully embraced the ergonomics Rust provides.

- The code is littered with `unwrap()` calls
- Unnecessary mutability 
- Manual indexing into arrays
- Unnecessary lifetime annotations
- Cryptic variable names

> - Very imperative coding style

Author: ```suggestion
- The code is littered with `unwrap()` calls
- Unnecessary mutability 
- Manual indexing into arrays
- Unnecessary lifetime annotations
- Cryptic variable names
- Very imperative coding style

Rust makes all of these problems painfully explicit. And if you refuse to learn how to avoid such problems, you will end up writing bad code in any programming language.
```

Author: Thanks, folded in.

- The code is littered with `unwrap()` calls
- Unnecessary mutability 
- Manual indexing into arrays
- Unnecessary lifetime annotations
- Cryptic variable names
- Very imperative coding style

Rust makes all of these problems painfully explicit. And if you refuse to learn how to avoid such problems, you will end up writing bad code in any programming language.

This not just makes the code harder to read. 
What is worse is that it leads to business logic bugs in the code, because the code makes quite a few unsound assumptions about its input.

If you feel like you're fighting the language, then there's a chance that **the language is trying to tell you something**. 
It tries to push you into a healthier direction, but you are resisting it, which causes friction.
The moment you start to listen to what Rust is trying to teach you, everything snaps into place; writing Rust becomes effortless and feels natural.

Here is one of my favorite things about Rust, that I never experienced in other languages: **better semantics enable nicer syntax.**

> That means, the more you learn about the core mechanics behind Rust (traits, pattern matching, expressions, composition over inheritance, etc.), the more you can leverage these concepts to write code that is readable and extensible.

Author: ```suggestion
That means, the more you learn about the core mechanics behind Rust (traits, pattern matching, expressions, composition over inheritance, etc.), the more you can leverage these concepts to write code that is readable and extensible.

The syntax takes a backseat. It gives way to semantics, which are much more important.
```

Author: Thanks, added.

+++
title = "When Rust Gets Ugly"
date = 2025-07-13
draft = false
template = "article.html"
[extra]
series = "Idiomatic Rust"
+++

In workshops I often see people getting frustrated with Rust.

Here's some of the feedback I hear: 

- The borrow checker rules make it hard to write code that compiles 
- The syntax is complex with too many symbols and operators -- it's overwhelming
- It's difficult to transition to Rust from a language they know 

> - Thee written code is not satisfying to read, it feels clunky and verbose

Reviewer: "The", maybe?

Author: thanks, fixed

+++
title = "When Rust Gets Ugly"
date = 2026-06-19
draft = false
template = "article.html"
[extra]
series = "Idiomatic Rust"
+++

In workshops I often see people getting frustrated with Rust.

Here's some of the feedback I hear: 

- "The borrow checker rules make it hard to write code that compiles."
- "It's overwhelming! The syntax is complex with too many symbols and operators. [^keywords]"
- "It's difficult to transition to Rust from <this other language I know>."
- "The code is not satisfying to read, it feels clunky and verbose."

> [^keywords]: It turns out that all 48 Rust keywords can [fit into 300 characters](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2024&gist=c1c8e31332776002d7030e2e242ebcee), so there really isn't that much syntax to begin with. 

Reviewer 2: This is only keywords, not operators like the turbofish... Maybe:

```suggestion
[^keywords]: It turns out that all 48 Rust keywords can [fit into 300 characters](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2024&gist=c1c8e31332776002d7030e2e242ebcee), so there isn't a crazy amount to begin with. 
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

slows down your learning process.
And down the road, it leads to business logic bugs in the code, because the compiler can't help you catch them. 

## Better Semantics Unlock Nicer Syntax

If you feel like you're fighting the language, then there's a chance that **the language is speaking to you**.
It tries to push you into a healthier direction, but if you resist, it will patiently wait until you give in. 
The moment you start to listen to what Rust is trying to teach you, everything snaps into place; writing Rust feels effortless and natural.

Here is one of my favorite things about Rust, that I never experienced in other languages: **better semantics unlock nicer syntax.**
That means, the more you lean into the core mechanics behind Rust (traits, pattern matching, expressions, composition over inheritance, etc.), the more you can build on these concepts to write code that is readable and extensible.

## The Five Stages Of Grief 

Whenever I see people struggle with Rust syntax, I'm reminded of the [five stages of grief](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_stages_of_grief) by Elisabeth Kübler-Ross:

> It's a common framework for understanding how people deal with loss, but I think it's a great analogy for how stubborn developers react to their first encounter with Rust.

Reviewer 2: The Criticism section is about as long as the description of the model itself. With "All models are wrong, but some are useful", this one isn't even that useful.

This whole section reads like a bad arm-chair diagnosis of people you haven't met. It could be slightly rewritten to come off as a humours take instead.

As it stands, I'd rather remove it completely than publish it unchanged.

Author: Thanks, removed it.

#### Stage 4: Depression

> "I'll never get used to this language. My code is a mess of references, clones, and unnecessary mutations that even I can't read anymore."

Reality sets in. Code becomes increasingly convoluted with mutable variables and needlessly low-level code.
What started as a promising project now feels like an unreadable jumble of syntax.
Although the code compiles, it is ugly and hard to maintain.
It just doesn't feel right but developers can't quite put their finger on why.
They feel trapped and don't know how to improve the situation or even which questions to ask.

#### Stage 5: Acceptance

> "After refactoring, I see now that these idioms exist for a reason. My code is not only safer but actually more readable when I embrace Rust's patterns instead of fighting them."

Finally, developers begin embracing idiomatic patterns and the philosophy behind Rust.
They refactor their spaghetti code and reach for stronger types rather than resisting them.

> Code becomes more maintainable, and they wonder how they ever wrote code in other languages without tooling that gives you such confidence.

Reviewer 2: You can write Rust code in any language too. You just don't get many of the safety features ;-)

## Let Go Of Old Bad Habits

Okay, you (or your team-member) reached acceptance, how can you do better?

The first step is to acknowledge that your existing code goes against Rust's design principles.
It's a band-aid around outdated ideas from the past still haunting you and holding back your progress.
**Ugly Rust code is a symptom of old, bad habits.**

Based on this realization, we can systematically improve the code.

> While we go through the refactoring, keep in mind that there is no single "right" way to improve the code, but that it all depends on the context and your goals.

Reviewer 2: We are 200 lines into an 850 line post, and just now you've set expectations for the rest of the post: we will refactor a common problem into idiomatic Rust and explain a generic approach along the way.

It's a lot of text to read to get to this point. If I share this with someone to help them improve their code, they have a lot of stuff to skip.

Author: Thanks, moved this up.

The reason is that strings are, in fact, really complicated!
There is an outdated assumption that strings are just an array of bytes, but that assumption is ill-defined and dangerous.
It is not true for all modern operating systems, including Windows, macOS, and Linux and you should stop thinking about strings that way.

Even in our simple example code from above, string splitting turns out to be a common source of bugs: 

```rust
let lines_with_refs: Vec<&'a str> = s.split('\n').collect();
```

This line expects that lines are separated by `\n`.
That's not true on Windows, where lines are separated by `\r\n`.

The following line does the right thing on all platforms:

```rust
let lines = s.lines();
```

This returns an [iterator over the lines of a string](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.lines).
Knowing that, we can instead iterate over each line:

```rust
for line in s.lines() {
    let line = line.trim();

    // ...
}
```

Note that we shadow `line` with `line.trim()`.
That is a common practice in Rust and very useful to keep the code clean.

It means we don't have to come up with a fancy new name for the trimmed line

> and we also don't have to fall back to cryptic names like `lref` or `l` instead.

Reviewer 2: ❤️

            None => return Err(ParseError::InvalidLine(line.to_string())),
        }
    }

    Ok(config)
}
```

The supporting `ParseError` type is mostly mechanical. We implement `Display` and
`Error` so it plays nicely with the rest of the error ecosystem, and a `From<std::io::Error>`
so that the `?` on `read_to_string` just works:

```rust
use std::fmt;
use std::error::Error;

#[derive(Debug)]
enum ParseError {
    InvalidLine(String),
    IoError(std::io::Error),
}

impl fmt::Display for ParseError {
    fn fmt(&self, f: &mut fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> fmt::Result {
        match self {
            ParseError::InvalidLine(line) => write!(f, "Invalid line format: {line}"),
            ParseError::IoError(err) => write!(f, "I/O error: {err}"),
        }
    }
}

// An empty body is fine here; we lean on the default `source()`.
impl Error for ParseError {}

impl From<std::io::Error> for ParseError {
    fn from(err: std::io::Error) -> Self {
        ParseError::IoError(err)
    }
}
```

Granted, our code has gotten quite a bit more verbose again.
But in comparison to the original code, the verbosity has a purpose: it marks the various bits and pieces of our code that can go wrong.

> We have agency to decide how to handle these errors gracefully on the call site rather than silently ignoring them.

Reviewer 2: This is the perfect place to mention thiserror, to reduce the verbosity to the bare minimum while still retaining the expressiveness of which errors can happen in our application.

While giving pointers into the ecosystem, it also takes a bit of the repulsiveness of "I have to write so much to gain so little".

Author: Thanks, added thiserror.

                    })
                }
            }
            None => Err(ParseError::InvalidLine(line.to_string())),
        }
    }
}
```

A natural reaction is to say "this is way too much work for such a simple problem."
And yes, taken in isolation, we are heavily yakshaving here.

Think of it this way: we can now reason about all edge-cases in isolation and errors get handled much closer to the source of the problem.
We turned our big ball of mud into a smaller thing that is easier to work with.

The entire Rust standard library is full of abstractions that build on top of each other to help solve bigger problems.
I encourage you to embrace that mindset shift.
Your code will be more maintainable and extensible.

Our `parse_config_file` function now becomes much simpler:

```rust
fn parse_config_file(path: &str) -> Result<HashMap<String, String>, ParseError> {
    let content = read_to_string(path)?;
    
    let mut config = HashMap::new();
    for line in content.lines() {
        match KeyValue::try_from(line) {
            Ok(kv) => { config.insert(kv.key, kv.value); },
            Err(ParseError::InvalidLine(_)) => continue, // Skip invalid lines

>             Err(e) => return Err(e),

Reviewer 2: For novice readers it might not be obvious that this is catching all errors other than InvalidLine.
```suggestion
            Err(e) => return Err(e), // Fail on any other error
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

//
// A newtype wrapper around `HashMap<String, String>` so we can change the
// internal representation later without breaking `EnvConfig`'s public API.
#[derive(Debug)]
struct EnvConfig(HashMap<String, String>);

impl EnvConfig {
    // Methods like `new`, `insert`, `get`, `len`,...
}

struct EnvParser;

impl EnvParser {
    fn parse<R: Read>(reader: R) -> Result<EnvConfig, ParseError> {
        let reader = BufReader::new(reader);
        let mut config = EnvConfig::new(); 

        for line in reader.lines() {
            match line {
                Ok(line_str) => {
                    match KeyValue::try_from(line_str) {
                        Ok(kv) => config.insert(kv),
                        // Skip invalid lines...
                        Err(ParseError::InvalidLine(_)) => continue,
                        // ...but return other errors
                        Err(e) => return Err(e),
                    }
                }
                Err(e) => return Err(ParseError::IoError(e)),
            }
        }

        Ok(config)
    }
    
    // Examples of parsing from different sources
    fn parse_str(input: &str) -> Result<EnvConfig, ParseError> {

>         Self::parse(input.as_bytes())

Reviewer 2: `as_bytes`? It looks like the `parse` function takes a String reader. Otherwise, why would we have to implement `TryFrom<String>` above?

It's super confusing that the reader is bytes based, and that the line iterating function handles the `String` conversion too.

Author: Thanks, changed to BufRead.

    }
    
    fn parse_file(path: &str) -> Result<EnvConfig, ParseError> {
        let file = File::open(path)?;
        Self::parse(file)
    }
}
```

Example usage:

```rust
fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn Error>> {
    let env_content = "
        DB_HOST=localhost
        DB_PORT=5432
        
        API_KEY=my_api_key
        LOG_FILE=app.log
    ";
    
    let config = EnvParser::parse_str(env_content)?;
    
    println!("Parsed config entries:");
    for (key, value) in &config.0 {
        println!("{} = {}", key, value);
    }
    
    Ok(())
}
```

Phew, that was a lot of code, but look how much more maintainable and extensible it is now!

> We could even go one step further and make the `EnvParser` struct implement `Iterator` so that you can iterate over the parsed key-value,

Reviewer 2: Maybe link to the iterator trait?

Author: Thanks, linked.

I skipped a few intermediate steps, but the idea is always the same: continuously
look for wrinkles in the code and move more and more logic into the type system.

## Did You Find All The Edge Cases?

Lastly, I'd like to come back to my initial question about edge cases.

Parsing environment files sounds simple on the surface, but that is absolutely not the case!
If you haven't already, I encourage you to write your own implementation of an environment file parser.

And once you're done, answer the following question:
How many of these cases do you handle in your own implementation?

- Empty lines should be skipped
- Comment lines starting with `#` should be skipped
- Leading and trailing whitespace in keys and values should be trimmed
- Empty keys like `=value` should be rejected
- Empty values like `key=` should be allowed (with empty string value)
- Lines without an equals sign should be rejected
- On Unix, `key=value=more` is valid and everything after the first `=` is part of the value
- Indented lines with leading whitespace should be parsed normally
- Duplicate keys should overwrite earlier ones with later values

> - Quoted values like `key="value"` keep their quotes in our solution

Reviewer 2: That is not an edge case! That's a choice! And I'd argue the wrong one for a functional parser.

```suggestion
- Quoted values like `key="value"` should not include the quotes in the value
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.
